# Introduction

<!-- [t00:00:00] --> Hello, everyone, welcome to <!-- [t00:00:03] --> what might be a series of courses on great psychologists. I've <!-- [t00:00:08] --> classified them according to their field of inquiry, we'll say <!-- [t00:00:11] --> and <!-- [t00:00:12] --> that would include constructivists. We'll talk about John <!-- [t00:00:15] --> Piaget, psycho analysts, existentialists, and phenomenologists. <!-- [t00:00:20] -->

<!-- [t00:00:20] --> So just explaining that name will take a certain amount of time, <!-- [t00:00:24] --> biologists and cyberneticist Send psychometrician. So just <!-- [t00:00:27] --> statistics students, and I would say that's a reasonable <!-- [t00:00:30] --> grouping to start to contemplate the <!-- [t00:00:35] --> the thought of the great psychologists and psychiatrists, <!-- [t00:00:38] --> research scientists and clinicians that guided the development <!-- [t00:00:42] --> of advanced psychological thought in the 20th, and the first <!-- [t00:00:46] --> part of the 21st century. We're going to start with John Piaget <!-- [t00:00:50] --> great developmental psychologist, he called himself a genetic <!-- [t00:00:53] --> Epistemologists rather than a psychologist and genetic means. <!-- [t00:00:58] -->

<!-- [t00:00:58] --> The origins of epistemology means knowledge. Essentially, <!-- [t00:01:02] --> ontology is the study of being an epistemology is the study of <!-- [t00:01:06] --> the knowledge of being and Piaget was extraordinarily interested <!-- [t00:01:09] --> in the relationship between religion and science. Most <!-- [t00:01:12] --> fundamentally although if you hear most people lecture about <!-- [t00:01:15] --> Piaget, that issue never comes up. But Piaget was very <!-- [t00:01:18] --> interested in the relationship between ethics and objective <!-- [t00:01:21] --> perception and he decided as a teenager that he was going to <!-- [t00:01:26] --> attempt to reconcile religion and science and I think in many <!-- [t00:01:29] --> ways, he did manage that. Although, because he was such a <!-- [t00:01:34] --> prolific thinker and such a great genius. It's taken people a <!-- [t00:01:38] --> long time to unpack his thought to the deepest possible levels. <!-- [t00:01:41] -->

<!-- [t00:01:41] --> Piaget was, <!-- [t00:01:43] --> he was offered the curatorship of a museum, I believe, when he <!-- [t00:01:46] --> was 12. On the basis of a scientific paper that he wrote, his <!-- [t00:01:49] --> parents wrote back after he was applied for the after, he was <!-- [t00:01:53] --> asked to take the job and told the people who offered it to him <!-- [t00:01:56] --> that he was only I think he was 12. And so that gives you some <!-- [t00:01:59] --> sense of exactly how smart jump Piaget was. psychoanalysts will <!-- [t00:02:03] --> talk about Sigmund Freud, who's credited in some sense with the <!-- [t00:02:07] --> discovery of the unconscious, which might be an overstatement. <!-- [t00:02:10] -->

<!-- [t00:02:10] --> But because there were certainly ideas about unconscious <!-- [t00:02:13] --> processes before Freud was particularly evident in the thinking <!-- [t00:02:16] --> of Nietzsche, I would say also in Dostoevsky, but Freud <!-- [t00:02:20] --> definitely synthesized the work to a tremendous degree and <!-- [t00:02:23] --> popularized it to a tremendous degree and also transformed the <!-- [t00:02:27] --> understanding of the unconscious into something that was <!-- [t00:02:29] --> clinically applicable medical theory. And so that was not <!-- [t00:02:33] --> nothing. And then Jung Ha, who has in some sense, a student of <!-- [t00:02:38] --> Freud's, but also a student of Nietzsche, probably equally. And <!-- [t00:02:42] --> Nietzsche believed that after the death of God, we would have to <!-- [t00:02:45] --> create our own values. And the psychoanalysts really criticized <!-- [t00:02:48] --> that idea to a great degree, noting, as they did, that, we <!-- [t00:02:53] --> couldn't create our own values, because we were subjected to <!-- [t00:02:56] --> already extant values within us, some of which had a biological <!-- [t00:03:00] --> basis. And so it was more a matter of coming to terms with the <!-- [t00:03:03] --> values that we already embodied in some sense. And that were, <!-- [t00:03:06] --> they're attempting to manifest themselves within us, rather than <!-- [t00:03:10] --> being able to create ourselves whole cloth out of nothing. And <!-- [t00:03:14] --> so Jung extended Freud's work, you could say that Freud dug into <!-- [t00:03:19] --> the basement and then Jung dug into the, what would you say the <!-- [t00:03:23] --> great chaos that lies beneath the personal unconscious to <!-- [t00:03:28] --> investigate and, and investigate the structure of and clarify <!-- [t00:03:32] --> the nature of <!-- [t00:03:34] --> the fundamental archetypal narratives that we use to <!-- [t00:03:37] --> conceptualize the world and to operate within it? The <!-- [t00:03:41] --> existentialists and phenomenologists existentialism is, I would <!-- [t00:03:45] --> say, an attempt to grapple with the fundamental limitations of <!-- [t00:03:52] --> human existence. <!-- [t00:03:54] -->

# Culture and Nature

<!-- [t00:03:54] --> The fact that we're subject culture the fact that we're subject <!-- [t00:03:58] --> to nature, the fact that we're subject to the vagaries of our <!-- [t00:04:01] --> own individual existence, and an exploration of what it means to <!-- [t00:04:05] --> become conscious of that and to act. In conscious realization of <!-- [t00:04:10] --> those facts. I would say phenomenologists were inspired by the <!-- [t00:04:15] --> philosopher Martin Heidegger and Heidegger <!-- [t00:04:19] --> believed that he revolutionized philosophy in some sense, by <!-- [t00:04:22] --> bringing it back to first principles. Heidegger was very <!-- [t00:04:24] --> interested not so much in analysis of the world as such, as a <!-- [t00:04:30] --> scientist might, but the domain of experience as such, and <!-- [t00:04:35] --> that's much broader than the objective world and so the <!-- [t00:04:38] --> phenomenological world so that's what appears to you, is not <!-- [t00:04:43] --> only characterized by that domain, we would describe as <!-- [t00:04:46] --> objective reality but also by the subjective experiences that <!-- [t00:04:50] --> are part and parcel of your field of experience. And so that <!-- [t00:04:52] --> would include motivations and emotions and dreams and images and <!-- [t00:04:55] --> imagination and thought, all of that as part of what Heidegger <!-- [t00:05:00] --> was trying to grapple with when he talked about reality, you <!-- [t00:05:03] --> know, because modern people, we're all scientists post <!-- [t00:05:07] --> enlightenment scientists in our epistemology in our philosophy, <!-- [t00:05:11] --> we tend to think of what is real as what is objective. But we <!-- [t00:05:14] --> don't act like that. We act for example, like our pain is real, <!-- [t00:05:18] --> and we act like our anxiety is real, and that our hunger is <!-- [t00:05:21] --> real. Even those are those are subjective states. And they're <!-- [t00:05:24] --> strange, subjective states to because they have a transpersonal <!-- [t00:05:27] --> element because you get hungry and I get hungry. And so even <!-- [t00:05:31] --> though hunger isn't something that manifests itself in the <!-- [t00:05:34] --> objective world, it's also not merely a subjective experience, <!-- [t00:05:37] --> right? Because there's a collective element to it. And according <!-- [t00:05:40] --> to people like Piaget, without that collective element to our <!-- [t00:05:44] --> subjective experience, we could never understand each other, <!-- [t00:05:47] --> right? I know what you mean when you say Hungary, not because I <!-- [t00:05:51] --> can deductively assess the meaning of your utterance or even use <!-- [t00:05:56] --> induction, but because I also get hungry, and I can use that as <!-- [t00:05:59] --> a reference and so <!-- [t00:06:01] --> well, the fact of our communication is predicated, at least to <!-- [t00:06:04] --> some degree on our shared subjectivity, as well as the stability <!-- [t00:06:09] --> of the objective world. <!-- [t00:06:11] -->

<!-- [t00:06:11] --> Heidegger's most <!-- [t00:06:15] --> influential ex applicators in the psychological world were <!-- [t00:06:20] --> Ludovic Binswanger, and Maynard boss, and they were particularly <!-- [t00:06:23] --> active in the post war period in the 1950s. And they're under <!-- [t00:06:28] --> appreciated psychologists, they were very famous in their time, <!-- [t00:06:31] --> they've fallen out of, of public notice, I would say to some <!-- [t00:06:35] --> degree replaced by such things as positive psychology, which I <!-- [t00:06:38] --> regard is extraordinarily, generally speaking, extraordinarily <!-- [t00:06:42] --> naive and simplistic in comparison to the existentialists of the <!-- [t00:06:46] --> 1950s. Maybe you could throw into that group, Viktor Frankl who <!-- [t00:06:51] --> was a psychiatrist who spent time in Auschwitz and who wrote a <!-- [t00:06:54] --> great who wrote a great deal on intrinsic meaning, and wrote a <!-- [t00:06:59] --> great book called Man's Search for Meaning, which is very much <!-- [t00:07:01] --> worth reading. And I also put Alexander Solzhenitsyn in that <!-- [t00:07:04] --> group, strangely enough, because he wasn't a psychologist. But <!-- [t00:07:07] --> his thought <!-- [t00:07:10] --> stemming out of the Dostoevsky and tradition, I would say, and <!-- [t00:07:12] --> to some degree, out of the Nietzschean tradition, is an <!-- [t00:07:15] --> elaboration of Victor Frankel's thought. And I would say not <!-- [t00:07:19] --> only an elaboration, but a deepening mean, Man's Search for <!-- [t00:07:22] --> Meaning is a great book, but it's relatively short, it's <!-- [t00:07:25] --> relatively popular, designed for a popular audience, not that <!-- [t00:07:28] --> there's anything wrong with that. But Solzhenitsyn's great work, <!-- [t00:07:32] --> the Gulag Archipelago, is a much deeper examination of the same <!-- [t00:07:35] --> sorts of things that Viktor Frankl was describing, especially <!-- [t00:07:38] --> the second volume of the Gulag Archipelago. So we'll cover all <!-- [t00:07:42] --> of that, <!-- [t00:07:44] --> in some to some degree, and the bulk biological thinkers. <!-- [t00:07:51] -->

<!-- [t00:07:51] --> Psychologists learned a tremendous amount from studying animals <!-- [t00:07:55] --> in the 20th century, at every level, behavioral, behavioral <!-- [t00:07:58] --> first right, with a with classical behaviors, like BF Skinner, <!-- [t00:08:03] --> who were very interested in how animals learned, and then that <!-- [t00:08:06] --> basically transformed itself into modern neuroscience. Because <!-- [t00:08:10] --> as the animal experimentalists got more and more sophisticated, <!-- [t00:08:13] --> they moved from the overt behavior of the animal itself into the <!-- [t00:08:16] --> neurological processes that were underlying those behaviors and <!-- [t00:08:19] --> started to delve deep into the brain. They've discovered things <!-- [t00:08:22] --> that are absolutely. <!-- [t00:08:25] -->

<!-- [t00:08:25] --> They're absolutely remarkable. And they're profoundly important <!-- [t00:08:28] --> philosophically, I would say, it's really not possible, in my <!-- [t00:08:31] --> estimation, to do proper philosophy, and possibly not even <!-- [t00:08:35] --> proper theology in the 21st century without being very much <!-- [t00:08:38] --> aware of what is going on. Neuro physiologically, meaning if <!-- [t00:08:43] --> you're going to analyze the structure of systems of knowledge, <!-- [t00:08:46] --> cognition, imagination, that sort of thing, it turns out to be <!-- [t00:08:50] --> extraordinarily useful to have some sense of how the brain <!-- [t00:08:52] --> actually works. And what that does, to some degree is <!-- [t00:08:55] --> particularized. The knowledge no. So there's an empirical idea <!-- [t00:08:59] --> of this is the empirical idea, for example, that we derive all <!-- [t00:09:02] --> of our knowledge from sense data. And then in some sense, the <!-- [t00:09:07] --> world is given to us in the sense data, and then everything we <!-- [t00:09:11] --> learned is merely a consequence of analyzing that data. That's <!-- [t00:09:14] --> actually wrong. It's wrong. And so the philosophical debate <!-- [t00:09:18] --> about that is over because in our sensory systems, which <!-- [t00:09:21] --> hypothetically process this sense data, there's more top down <!-- [t00:09:25] --> elaboration of the sense data from the brain, then there is <!-- [t00:09:29] --> bottom up, what would you call it input from the empirical world <!-- [t00:09:33] --> and so even at the most basic level of visual and auditory <!-- [t00:09:37] --> perception, you're structuring your perception of the world as <!-- [t00:09:41] --> you perceive it. So you're imposing some order on the <!-- [t00:09:44] --> perception, right from first principles. And so the notion that <!-- [t00:09:48] --> you derive all your information from raw sense data? Well, it's <!-- [t00:09:52] --> not true neurophysiological II It's also impossible technically, <!-- [t00:09:55] --> because there are too many, there's too much data, and so you <!-- [t00:09:58] --> have the problem of what to attend <!-- [t00:10:00] --> Doing what not to attend to. And that is not a trivial problem. <!-- [t00:10:03] -->

<!-- [t00:10:03] --> That is the problem. It's a major problem. And so, the best <!-- [t00:10:08] --> neurobiologists, neuro psychologists that I ever encountered <!-- [t00:10:11] --> were Jeffrey Gray, he wrote a book called The neuro psychology <!-- [t00:10:14] --> of anxiety. It's absolutely brilliant book very, very difficult <!-- [t00:10:17] --> to read, because it's so dense and, and, and, and so careful. <!-- [t00:10:21] -->

# Affective Neuroscience

<!-- [t00:10:21] --> Jaak Panksepp, who wrote a book called Affective Neuroscience, <!-- [t00:10:25] --> so emotional neuroscience and Panksepp did more than anyone else <!-- [t00:10:28] --> to develop an elaborated theory of fundamental human motivation, <!-- [t00:10:32] --> also, very lucid writer, the neuro psychology of anxiety is a <!-- [t00:10:36] --> very, very hard book. But but an effective neuroscience you can <!-- [t00:10:41] --> actually read that I mean, as as, as a layman, and I would <!-- [t00:10:44] --> highly recommend that it is a great book, it might be the best <!-- [t00:10:47] --> book written on biological psychology in the last 50 years. And <!-- [t00:10:51] --> that's really saying something Larry Swanson also is not someone <!-- [t00:10:54] --> who's well known as a psychologist, but he wrote a great paper <!-- [t00:10:57] --> on the function of the hypothalamus and the underlying structure <!-- [t00:11:01] --> of the brain. In part he was a developmental embryologist knows <!-- [t00:11:05] --> a lot about how the brain develops across time, he's done a <!-- [t00:11:08] --> lovely job of mapping out the brain in terms of its structure, <!-- [t00:11:11] --> but also in terms of its function. And it's not easy to figure <!-- [t00:11:15] --> out how to map the brain because you could do that merely as a <!-- [t00:11:18] --> consequence of analyzing, let's say, its cellular structure, or <!-- [t00:11:21] --> the way that cellular structure is organized. But you can also <!-- [t00:11:24] --> map it functionally. And Panksepp mapped it functionally, as <!-- [t00:11:28] --> well as neuro anatomically, and as a much more useful approach <!-- [t00:11:32] --> as far as I'm concerned, because the brain is actually something <!-- [t00:11:35] --> that does things and to to understand its components in terms of <!-- [t00:11:38] --> its function, especially if that maps on to the underlying <!-- [t00:11:41] --> structure is more useful than merely mapping. And as a <!-- [t00:11:44] --> consequence of structure. He also understood how it unfolded, <!-- [t00:11:48] --> through embryo logical development. And that's also useful <!-- [t00:11:51] --> because it enables you to map the structure and function of the <!-- [t00:11:53] --> brain back onto the evolutionary process. And so Swanson wrote a <!-- [t00:11:57] --> great paper, which we'll progress through, at least to some <!-- [t00:12:01] --> degree, it's only 30 pages long or something like that, but <!-- [t00:12:04] --> takes like about two years to read, because it's, he packed 35 <!-- [t00:12:08] --> years of information into it. And then, Norbert Wiener was a <!-- [t00:12:12] --> cyberneticist at MIT, who was operating mostly in the 20s and <!-- [t00:12:15] --> 30s, if I remember correctly, and he was one of the pioneers of <!-- [t00:12:18] --> artificial intelligence, and he basically laid out the <!-- [t00:12:22] --> fundamental, <!-- [t00:12:24] --> what would you say requirements for a minimally intelligent <!-- [t00:12:27] --> system, and his work was unbelievably influential in artificial <!-- [t00:12:31] --> intelligence and robotics in computational theory, in <!-- [t00:12:34] --> developmental psychology, because Piaget knew about him. He his <!-- [t00:12:38] --> theory formed the basis for Jeffrey Gray's book, The neuro <!-- [t00:12:40] --> psychology of anxiety. And so Weiner was extremely influential. <!-- [t00:12:44] -->

<!-- [t00:12:44] --> And so <!-- [t00:12:47] --> and then there's the psychometricians. Basically, these people <!-- [t00:12:49] --> were statisticians and <!-- [t00:12:52] --> psychologists fundamentally established pretty much all this. A <!-- [t00:12:57] --> lot of them were engineers who went into psychology is quite <!-- [t00:12:59] --> interesting and, and <!-- [t00:13:02] --> the many of the engineers who went into psychology established <!-- [t00:13:06] --> the basis of the statistics that all the social sciences use it <!-- [t00:13:09] --> use. And psychology has got a leg up on most of the social <!-- [t00:13:13] --> sciences because of that statistical prowess. And so you'll see <!-- [t00:13:16] --> increasingly, in schools of economics and business schools, <!-- [t00:13:19] --> they're invaded by psychologists because of their statistical <!-- [t00:13:22] --> acumen. And the statisticians made a variety of extremely potent <!-- [t00:13:27] --> contributions to psychology, including the development of the <!-- [t00:13:30] --> theory of general cognitive ability, which is the theory of <!-- [t00:13:33] --> intelligence, and then the fundamental psychometric slash <!-- [t00:13:36] --> statistical theories of personality, which are the dominant <!-- [t00:13:39] --> theories of personality, at least at the trait level, like what <!-- [t00:13:44] --> elements of your personality are stable across time? And how are <!-- [t00:13:48] --> those elements related to each other? And how many are there? <!-- [t00:13:51] --> Technically speaking, that was all derived a theoretically, <!-- [t00:13:54] --> merely as a consequence of the almost a theoretically, the <!-- [t00:13:58] --> theory was for the development of personality theory was that <!-- [t00:14:03] --> you could analyze the human lexicon. So that's the entire body <!-- [t00:14:06] --> of words. And that there would be information about personality <!-- [t00:14:10] --> reliably coded in that lexicon, because people talk about and <!-- [t00:14:14] --> one understand each other constantly. And so if you could assess <!-- [t00:14:17] --> the manner in which we use descriptive words, statistically, and <!-- [t00:14:21] --> look at the relationship between one word another, like you <!-- [t00:14:23] --> might say, or our happy and joyful, set the same concept. Well, <!-- [t00:14:28] --> you can you can figure that out statistically by looking at how <!-- [t00:14:31] --> people answer questions in relationship to words, but also how <!-- [t00:14:35] --> those words are used in natural language and you can produce <!-- [t00:14:37] --> clumps of words that go together, sad, frustrated, miserable, <!-- [t00:14:41] --> disappointed, unhappy, ashamed. <!-- [t00:14:44] -->

<!-- [t00:14:44] --> Withdrawal, avoidance, pain, anxiety. You can see that there's a <!-- [t00:14:51] --> chord, all those words, they're all bad, they're all negative, <!-- [t00:14:54] --> and so that they actually clumped together as it turns out, and <!-- [t00:14:57] --> they define a trait called neuroticism which is the end of it. <!-- [t00:15:00] -->

# Negative Emotion

<!-- [t00:15:00] --> Jul susceptibility to negative emotion. And that statistical <!-- [t00:15:03] --> analysis of the lexicon has been mapped onto the underlying <!-- [t00:15:07] --> neural psychophysiology, over a period of about 20 years by <!-- [t00:15:10] --> people, many people in my lab did that call Andy Young is <!-- [t00:15:14] --> notable in that regard. He's, maybe he was one of the people who <!-- [t00:15:17] --> established the field of <!-- [t00:15:20] --> personality neuroscience, which is a new field. And we started <!-- [t00:15:24] --> working on that mapping. Gray did a lot of that he was a student <!-- [t00:15:28] --> of Hans Eysenck, Ising, mapped extraversion and neuroticism on <!-- [t00:15:32] --> to animal behavior. So he's the first person who really got <!-- [t00:15:35] --> there, he was very famous English psychologist, and, well, one <!-- [t00:15:39] --> of the great psychometricians. So John Carroll, there's many <!-- [t00:15:44] --> people contributed to the development of the theory of general <!-- [t00:15:47] --> cognitive ability, but John Carroll probably developed the most <!-- [t00:15:50] --> integrated and differentiated model of general cognitive ability <!-- [t00:15:54] --> that's measured with IQ tests, and people aren't very happy with <!-- [t00:15:57] --> IQ tests, but that's too bad for them, because they are the most <!-- [t00:16:00] --> reliable and valid psychometric tests that have ever been <!-- [t00:16:03] --> developed by anyone in social science to measure anything by a <!-- [t00:16:06] --> factor of about four. And so you throw them out, you throw <!-- [t00:16:09] --> everything out, that statisticians have contributed to the <!-- [t00:16:13] --> social sciences. And so, tough luck, that's how the world works. <!-- [t00:16:17] -->

<!-- [t00:16:17] --> It is kind of rough, because the IQ literature's a rough place <!-- [t00:16:20] --> to, to do research in and and it reveals very rough things about <!-- [t00:16:25] --> the magnitude of human differences. And things that we really <!-- [t00:16:29] --> have to grapple with and socially and, and individually and <!-- [t00:16:32] --> things that our inability to grapple with, have, in some sense, <!-- [t00:16:36] --> torn our society apart. I'll give you one example of that is <!-- [t00:16:39] --> that the US military decided to 40 years ago, something like <!-- [t00:16:43] --> that, that it was illegal to induct. So the whole government <!-- [t00:16:46] --> actually illegal to induct anybody into the American armed <!-- [t00:16:49] --> forces had an IQ of less than 82, after 85 years of strenuous <!-- [t00:16:54] --> cognitive testing, because the US military was at the forefront <!-- [t00:16:57] --> of that kind of research, trying to figure out which people <!-- [t00:17:00] --> could be promoted to Officer capacity rapidly, especially in <!-- [t00:17:03] --> times of wartime, very interested in issues of competence. They <!-- [t00:17:07] --> did a lot of the basic psychometric work that helped establish <!-- [t00:17:10] --> the field of general cognitive ability testing. And they decided <!-- [t00:17:13] --> after about 80 years of doing so that if you had an IQ of less <!-- [t00:17:17] --> than 82, there wasn't a single thing you could do in the <!-- [t00:17:19] --> military, that wasn't positively counterproductive. And you <!-- [t00:17:22] --> think that's interesting, because they're desperate for people, <!-- [t00:17:24] --> right? So there, plus, both liberals and conservatives alike <!-- [t00:17:28] --> like to use the military as a means of moving people from the <!-- [t00:17:30] --> working class happened to the middle class, educating them, <!-- [t00:17:33] --> disciplining them, giving them an opportunity and so forth. And <!-- [t00:17:36] --> so that was cross, what would you say across the aisle, a <!-- [t00:17:40] --> political agreement that such a thing would be worthwhile, and <!-- [t00:17:43] --> that was still the conclusion they reach? That's 10% of the <!-- [t00:17:46] --> population. Right. And so, you know, the liberals think you can <!-- [t00:17:50] --> educate anyone to do anything that's wrong. And not only is it <!-- [t00:17:53] --> wrong, it's seriously naively blindly wrong. And the <!-- [t00:17:57] --> conservatives think, well, if you just work hard enough, you get <!-- [t00:18:00] --> ahead. It's like, Yeah, well, <!-- [t00:18:04] --> for people on the lower end of the cognitive distribution, it <!-- [t00:18:08] --> takes an awful lot of work, let me tell you, and that doesn't <!-- [t00:18:10] --> mean it's going to be successful even then. And so there's a <!-- [t00:18:15] --> tremendous span of human ability. It's not, it's not normally <!-- [t00:18:19] --> distributed, by the way, it's purrito distributed. And so, you <!-- [t00:18:22] --> know, there's a huge difference between someone who's one in <!-- [t00:18:25] --> 10,001, in 1001, and 100, you know, you think 99% Oh, one and <!-- [t00:18:30] --> 199.9% out one and 1,099.991, in 10,000. You know, I was walking <!-- [t00:18:38] --> through Westminster Abbey about a month ago, and there's a lot <!-- [t00:18:41] --> of famous people buried in Westminster Abbey, and you had to be <!-- [t00:18:45] --> pretty damn famous to be buried in Westminster Abbey. But most <!-- [t00:18:51] --> of the people that are buried there, you don't know. So those <!-- [t00:18:54] --> people who are one in 10,000 baby who were buried in Westminster <!-- [t00:18:57] --> Abbey, it's like one in 10 of them is actually famous enough for <!-- [t00:19:00] --> you to know. And so, and they're like, way more famous than the <!-- [t00:19:05] --> next most famous people. And you see that in every domain of <!-- [t00:19:09] --> human productive activities. There's this terrible, terrible <!-- [t00:19:12] --> distribution where most people stack up at zero, no talent, no <!-- [t00:19:17] --> ability in that area whatsoever. And there's some tiny outliers <!-- [t00:19:20] --> weigh the hell out of the, say, one in a million end of the <!-- [t00:19:23] --> distribution, and they make contributions that are, like, <!-- [t00:19:27] --> incalculable. And so it's a painful fact of human life that that <!-- [t00:19:32] --> much variability exists. Although, you know, what would you do? <!-- [t00:19:37] --> stop that from happening? You know, that's the issue. It's <!-- [t00:19:40] --> painful that that much variability exists. That's true <!-- [t00:19:43] --> diversity. That's what that is. And it has painful consequences <!-- [t00:19:47] --> as well because, for example, some people are one in 10,000 good <!-- [t00:19:51] --> at <!-- [t00:19:52] --> accumulating money. And so that's what accounts for the, you <!-- [t00:19:56] --> know, 1% of the population has 50% of the financial reason <!-- [t00:20:00] --> narcissists, I think that 50 richest people in the world have as <!-- [t00:20:03] --> much money as the bottom 3 billion. It's something like that <!-- [t00:20:07] --> think, oh my God, that's unfair. It's like, every single domain <!-- [t00:20:10] --> of creative activity is like that. Every single one. It's the <!-- [t00:20:14] --> case in sports. It's the case in music. It's the case in, in. <!-- [t00:20:18] -->

<!-- [t00:20:18] --> Yeah, it doesn't matter what you look at, that distribution <!-- [t00:20:22] --> applies. And so and part of that's driven by general cognitive <!-- [t00:20:25] --> ability. And so that's a rough fact. And, and it isn't, you <!-- [t00:20:29] --> know, one of the naive things that people do, especially on the <!-- [t00:20:32] --> left, not that there's not naive things that people do on the <!-- [t00:20:34] --> right, but on the left, people think, well, the cause of <!-- [t00:20:37] --> inequality is capitalism. It's like, yeah, yeah, right. It's <!-- [t00:20:41] --> like, no, it's way worse problem than that. Like, it be devils <!-- [t00:20:47] --> or advantages. Every social system, in every single domain of <!-- [t00:20:51] --> human activity has nothing to do with capitalism at all its way, <!-- [t00:20:56] --> if you think it's a problem, it's a way deeper problem than <!-- [t00:20:58] --> that. And so just mucking about with the structure of capitalism <!-- [t00:21:02] --> is not going to get rid of inequality, that's for sure. We're <!-- [t00:21:06] --> gonna start with Nietzsche. <!-- [t00:21:08] -->

<!-- [t00:21:08] --> And he's not really regarded as a psychologist. But that's <!-- [t00:21:12] --> because most psychologists don't read philosophy. And if they <!-- [t00:21:15] --> did, they would certainly regard Nietzsche as a psychologist and <!-- [t00:21:18] --> also dusty husky, and not only a psychologist but great <!-- [t00:21:21] --> psychologists. And Nietzsche was a great psychologist, and he <!-- [t00:21:24] --> was a tremendous influence on Carl Jung Spak fact Jung spent <!-- [t00:21:29] --> almost all his life trying to address the issues that need you <!-- [t00:21:33] --> that Nietzsche first made into questions. One of the things you <!-- [t00:21:38] --> see when you're studying real geniuses is that they're sometimes <!-- [t00:21:42] --> often incomprehensible. Sometimes it's because they're <!-- [t00:21:45] --> difficult. Sometimes it's because they can't really write <!-- [t00:21:48] --> clearly. I would say that's the case. With Heidegger, he's <!-- [t00:21:51] --> notoriously difficult to read. Jung is also very difficult to <!-- [t00:21:55] --> read, but it's not because he can't write. With Jung, it's a <!-- [t00:21:58] --> different thing. He's asking questions that you don't know <!-- [t00:22:01] --> exist, and then answering them. And so if you're really a <!-- [t00:22:04] --> genius, it's like, you're asking questions that no one else can <!-- [t00:22:07] --> even formulate yet you don't even know their questions. And Jung <!-- [t00:22:11] --> was way out on asking questions that no one else had thought out <!-- [t00:22:15] --> limb. And if you know what he's talking about, then all of a <!-- [t00:22:19] --> sudden what he's talking about becomes comprehensible. And so <!-- [t00:22:22] --> And Nietzsche was one of these people, he generated all sorts of <!-- [t00:22:25] --> questions that no one had really ever generated in that manner. <!-- [t00:22:29] -->

<!-- [t00:22:29] --> And then Jung spent a lot of time trying to answer those <!-- [t00:22:32] --> questions, and lay out a couple of them here. These are <!-- [t00:22:36] --> propositions in some sense, Nietzsche was a very unwell man, he <!-- [t00:22:41] --> was very physically ill. And he, he degenerated into an <!-- [t00:22:47] --> untreatable illness in his belief in his 40s, which is very, <!-- [t00:22:52] --> very unfortunate. But even when he was <!-- [t00:22:56] --> still able to write, he couldn't write it for long. His physical <!-- [t00:22:59] --> illness prevented him from writing for <!-- [t00:23:03] --> extended periods of time. So he tended to write a floristically. <!-- [t00:23:06] -->

<!-- [t00:23:06] --> So he'd think for like, who knows how long a week, and at a very <!-- [t00:23:10] --> fast rate, you could imagine, like 100 times faster than the <!-- [t00:23:15] --> typical person might. And then he would write down a sentence or <!-- [t00:23:18] --> write down a paragraph that was just absolutely packed with <!-- [t00:23:21] --> ideas. And it's really something to read book like, people <!-- [t00:23:24] --> usually start with Nietzsche, they start with, Thus Spake <!-- [t00:23:27] --> Zarathustra, and I wouldn't recommend that it's, it's a poetic <!-- [t00:23:30] --> work, and it's quite emotional. It's written in a kind of quasi <!-- [t00:23:34] --> biblical language, and it gives you really the wrong idea about <!-- [t00:23:36] --> Nietzsche that was his foray in some sense into poetry and <!-- [t00:23:39] --> literature. And that can be much broader than pure philosophy <!-- [t00:23:43] --> and Thus Spake Zarathustra, Yun conducted a seminar that has <!-- [t00:23:47] --> 1200 pages of notes on the first 1/3 of Thus Spake Zarathustra, <!-- [t00:23:53] --> right. And so that tells you something about Jung and it also <!-- [t00:23:55] --> tells you something about Nietzsche. And it's actually a great <!-- [t00:23:58] --> book. It's two volumes on the first third of the Spake <!-- [t00:24:01] --> Zarathustra, so unbelievable. And so here's here's a Nietzsche <!-- [t00:24:06] --> and observation, just because our moral philosophers, he's <!-- [t00:24:11] --> speaking of Europe, he's speaking of what would you say <!-- [t00:24:14] --> parochial European philosophers before the age of European <!-- [t00:24:18] --> expansionism, let's say, just because our moral philosophers <!-- [t00:24:21] --> knew the facts of morality. So what morality was only very <!-- [t00:24:25] --> approximately in arbitrary extracts or an accidental epitomes, <!-- [t00:24:31] --> for example, <!-- [t00:24:33] --> as the morality of their environment, their class, their church, <!-- [t00:24:38] --> the spirit of their time, their climate and part of the world <!-- [t00:24:43] --> just because they were poorly informed, and not even very <!-- [t00:24:46] --> curious about different people, times and past ages. They never <!-- [t00:24:52] --> laid eyes on the real problem of morality. <!-- [t00:24:56] -->

<!-- [t00:24:56] --> For these emerge only when we compare men <!-- [t00:25:00] --> II moralities <!-- [t00:25:02] --> in all science of morals so far, one thing was lacking. Strange <!-- [t00:25:07] --> as it may sound, the problem of morality itself, what was <!-- [t00:25:11] --> lacking was any suspicion that there was something problematic <!-- [t00:25:14] --> here? Well, you just can hardly believe how smart that is. It's <!-- [t00:25:20] --> so smart. I mean, <!-- [t00:25:22] --> Nietzsche was writing after the age of European expansionism, <!-- [t00:25:25] --> let's say, when Europeans became increasingly aware, and I <!-- [t00:25:30] --> suppose at the same time, so did the rest of the world, that <!-- [t00:25:33] --> there were many moralities extent in many different places in <!-- [t00:25:37] --> the world. And that's a problem, right? Because if you have a <!-- [t00:25:41] --> morality and you therefore think you're right, and not only do <!-- [t00:25:44] --> you think you're right, but you think you're good when you're <!-- [t00:25:46] --> acting out your morality, what do you do with the fact that when <!-- [t00:25:49] --> you go to somewhere else in the world, a different moral system <!-- [t00:25:51] --> seems to apply? And Nietzsche would say, Well, one answer to <!-- [t00:25:57] --> that is, you attempt to eradicate the alternative morality, <!-- [t00:26:01] --> because of course, you're right, and you're good. <!-- [t00:26:05] -->

# Ideas

<!-- [t00:26:05] --> But it's not so easy to get rid of ideas. It's also not that <!-- [t00:26:08] --> easy to get rid of people. And it's also not that easy. If <!-- [t00:26:12] --> you're thoughtful, and you meet your enemy, let's say, to deal <!-- [t00:26:15] --> with the fact that he might be quite Lord like you. And he also <!-- [t00:26:19] --> thinks that he's good and right. And it seems to be working for <!-- [t00:26:22] --> him, there. And then. And so one response to that is, well, <!-- [t00:26:28] --> there's a plurality of moralities. But then that's a real <!-- [t00:26:31] --> problem, isn't it? Because if there's a plurality of moralities, <!-- [t00:26:34] --> what makes you think you're right or good? And then that's not <!-- [t00:26:38] --> even, that isn't even the problem. The problem is way worse than <!-- [t00:26:41] --> that. What makes you think that there is such a thing as right <!-- [t00:26:44] --> or good? <!-- [t00:26:46] --> Right? And so not only do you then question whether your <!-- [t00:26:49] --> morality is right, you question whether there is any such thing <!-- [t00:26:53] --> as morality? And that's Nietzsche's point. It's like, because we <!-- [t00:26:57] --> came into contact with each other very precipitously, let's say, <!-- [t00:27:01] --> the problem of what morale what morality is started to become a <!-- [t00:27:04] --> problem. And even more deeply the problem of whether or not <!-- [t00:27:08] --> there is any such thing as a morality, let alone a valid <!-- [t00:27:12] --> morality immediately emerged as a prime, philosophical, <!-- [t00:27:16] --> theological, ethical, moral, individual psychological problem. <!-- [t00:27:20] -->

<!-- [t00:27:20] --> And if you don't think you have that problem, it's just because <!-- [t00:27:22] --> you don't know yourself very well. You absolutely have that <!-- [t00:27:25] --> problem. Modern people have that problem. And so young took this <!-- [t00:27:30] --> sort of thing extremely seriously. It was like, okay, and sort <!-- [t00:27:33] --> of Piaget, by the way, although I don't know if Piaget was <!-- [t00:27:36] --> directly influenced by Nietzsche. Although, at that time, and in <!-- [t00:27:39] --> that place, it was very difficult to be a European without being <!-- [t00:27:42] --> deeply influenced by Nietzsche. But certainly Piaget, who became <!-- [t00:27:46] --> interested in the development of morality and children, was <!-- [t00:27:49] --> exactly attempting to, as I said, reconcile the difference <!-- [t00:27:52] --> between religion and science. And it was of course, Nietzsche, <!-- [t00:27:55] --> who announced so famously that God was dead. Right. And <!-- [t00:27:58] --> Dostoyevsky, at the same time said, Well, if there's no God, <!-- [t00:28:01] --> everything is permitted. And that's Crime and Punishment, which <!-- [t00:28:04] --> I would highly recommend. That's a great book because <!-- [t00:28:07] --> Dostoyevsky's character Raskolnikov acts out. He sets out <!-- [t00:28:11] --> consciously to act out the atheistic proposition that there is <!-- [t00:28:15] --> no morality as such, there's no higher God say that you don't <!-- [t00:28:19] --> serve anything. And why can't you just do exactly what you want? <!-- [t00:28:23] --> And that's why Raskolnikov murderers and old woman and crime and <!-- [t00:28:26] --> punishment has other reasons. It's a brilliantly set up book, <!-- [t00:28:29] --> and it's a great examination to create examination of the <!-- [t00:28:32] --> problem is the greatest examination of that problem. Why can't <!-- [t00:28:35] --> you just do exactly what you want? And in some sense, it is <!-- [t00:28:38] --> addressing niches proposition that in the aftermath of the death <!-- [t00:28:42] --> of God, that we would have to create our own values. Dostoevsky. <!-- [t00:28:45] -->

<!-- [t00:28:45] --> Well, Dostoevsky is deeper than Nietzsche. And that doesn't mean <!-- [t00:28:50] --> smarter because Dostoevsky told stories and Nietzsche was a <!-- [t00:28:53] --> propositional philosopher. And that's a very, very difficult <!-- [t00:28:57] --> thing. That basically means you take the morals from stories and <!-- [t00:29:00] --> make them systematic. And so Nietzsche could do that. Dostoevsky <!-- [t00:29:04] --> could rely on the story and I'm not saying he wasn't a genius, <!-- [t00:29:07] --> because he absolutely was. He was right in ways that Nietzsche <!-- [t00:29:11] --> was wrong. But they make great pair to read together. It's <!-- [t00:29:16] --> unbelievably enlightening. It's unbelievably enlightening. And <!-- [t00:29:19] --> so but here's the here's the problem is well, okay, now we're <!-- [t00:29:22] --> faced with the problem of morality as such. That's part of the <!-- [t00:29:25] --> science religion conflict problem, too, because, hypothetically, <!-- [t00:29:28] --> science is the world stripped of value, right? It's just the <!-- [t00:29:32] --> objective facts, ma'am. It's like, fair enough. But what do you <!-- [t00:29:36] --> do? In the face of those facts? How do you act? How do you <!-- [t00:29:39] --> arrange yourself? How do you organize your behavior? How do you <!-- [t00:29:41] --> organize your societies? Well, David Hume said famously, there <!-- [t00:29:45] --> is no clear path from is what is to what should be, well, that's <!-- [t00:29:50] --> a big problem, man. Like it's a massive problem because you're <!-- [t00:29:54] --> in the world of facts, but you have to act and so how is it that <!-- [t00:29:57] --> you structure yourself so that you know how to act <!-- [t00:30:00] --> And Nietzsche was the first philosopher, arguably who made that <!-- [t00:30:03] --> problem real clear. It's like, we just took morality for <!-- [t00:30:06] --> granted. And in some sense, like, it's actually a major problem <!-- [t00:30:10] --> philosophically, what? What is morality? What should be at the <!-- [t00:30:13] --> highest place? And Jung spent his whole life trying to answer <!-- [t00:30:17] --> that question. And read really successfully, I would say, as as <!-- [t00:30:21] --> did Piaget, very successfully, and, and that's partly why it's <!-- [t00:30:25] --> so necessary to know what these people thought and at a deep <!-- [t00:30:29] --> level mean, often, to take a psychology course, the thought of <!-- [t00:30:36] --> the geniuses is watered down in some sense. I think that people <!-- [t00:30:41] --> who teach are often embarrassed by the people they're teaching <!-- [t00:30:44] --> because their thought goes so far. It's unsettling and you know, <!-- [t00:30:49] --> so they're simplified. Piaget is almost always taught as a stage <!-- [t00:30:52] --> theorist because he talked about stages of development in <!-- [t00:30:54] --> children, which is like 1% of his writing, something like that. <!-- [t00:30:59] -->

<!-- [t00:30:59] --> And I had never heard from anyone until I started to read Piaget <!-- [t00:31:05] --> in the original and some histories of his thought that I was <!-- [t00:31:08] --> introduced to by a very smart developmental psychologist when I <!-- [t00:31:11] --> worked at Harvard. And he caught me on to some books that really <!-- [t00:31:16] --> went into Piaget thought in depth and started to lay out the <!-- [t00:31:19] --> totality of his enterprise. I had no idea that Piaget was trying <!-- [t00:31:22] --> to reconcile religion and science that that was his fundamental <!-- [t00:31:25] --> motivation that he swore he would do that when he was an <!-- [t00:31:28] --> adolescent. And that was driving all of his investigation into <!-- [t00:31:31] --> childhood thought it's like, <!-- [t00:31:34] --> Good luck finding a textbook on psychology that'll tell you <!-- [t00:31:36] --> that. I had a good text by rye shellac. And it was published in <!-- [t00:31:41] --> 1982. And I used it continually. And rice like did a good job of <!-- [t00:31:45] --> all the people pretty much all the people that we're going to <!-- [t00:31:47] --> talk about today, except the ones who emerged after 1982. So <!-- [t00:31:51] --> anyways, that's one of Nietzsche's questions. This is another <!-- [t00:31:54] --> one. This is bloody brilliant too. <!-- [t00:31:58] -->

<!-- [t00:31:58] --> He said that they separate philosophical ideas are not anything <!-- [t00:32:04] --> optional, or autonomously evolving, but grew up in connection <!-- [t00:32:09] --> and relationship with each other. <!-- [t00:32:12] -->

<!-- [t00:32:12] --> That however, suddenly, and arbitrarily, they seem to appear in <!-- [t00:32:15] --> the history of thought. They nevertheless belong just as much to <!-- [t00:32:19] --> assist them as the collective members of the fauna of a <!-- [t00:32:23] --> continent. This has betrayed in the end by the circumstance. <!-- [t00:32:27] -->

# Philosophy

<!-- [t00:32:27] --> However, how unfailingly the most diverse philosophers always <!-- [t00:32:32] --> fill in again, a definite fundamental scheme of possible <!-- [t00:32:36] --> philosophies under an invisible spell, they always revolve once <!-- [t00:32:41] --> more in the same orbit, however, independent of each other, they <!-- [t00:32:44] --> may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills, <!-- [t00:32:48] --> something within them leads them, something impels them in <!-- [t00:32:51] --> definite order, the one after the other to wit, the innate <!-- [t00:32:55] --> methodology, and relationship of their ideas. Their thinking is, <!-- [t00:33:00] --> in fact, less a discovery far less at Discovery than our re <!-- [t00:33:05] --> recognizing a remembering in the Platonic sense, let's say, it's <!-- [t00:33:09] --> Plato believed that we all we knew everything before we were <!-- [t00:33:13] --> born, and then we were born, and we forgot everything. And as we <!-- [t00:33:16] --> learn, we remember what we once knew. You think? Well, that's <!-- [t00:33:20] --> quite the bizarre metaphysical idea, but it's not so bizarre. <!-- [t00:33:25] -->

<!-- [t00:33:25] --> One of the things that people say to me a lot, I have this said <!-- [t00:33:29] --> to me, I would say it 1000s of times, is that I've given words <!-- [t00:33:32] --> to things they knew to be true. It's like, well, how did you <!-- [t00:33:35] --> know those to be true? Exactly. You didn't have the words for it <!-- [t00:33:38] --> exactly. couldn't articulate it, you know, and you know, what <!-- [t00:33:41] --> it's like is, you hear something stated? And you think it <!-- [t00:33:44] --> strikes you, right? Yes, that's right. That's right, that <!-- [t00:33:46] --> matches that fits. Well, that's what Nietzsche is pointing to in <!-- [t00:33:50] --> this discussion is the idea that there isn't this infinite <!-- [t00:33:54] --> landscape of ideas. In some sense, they're ideas that fit, <!-- [t00:33:57] --> right, they snap into place, they, they hit you with the force <!-- [t00:34:00] --> of insight or the force of a blow. And it's because they map on <!-- [t00:34:04] --> to something that's already operating within you. That's an <!-- [t00:34:07] --> extraordinarily useful thing to know. And I would say you'll see <!-- [t00:34:10] --> this as we walk through these thinkers, because if you go into <!-- [t00:34:13] --> what they're thinking deep enough, you see how they're united. <!-- [t00:34:16] -->

<!-- [t00:34:16] --> And that's, that was a really fun adventure for me because I <!-- [t00:34:19] --> started teaching personality in 1993. When I first went to <!-- [t00:34:24] --> Harvard when I was when I was hired there. <!-- [t00:34:28] -->

<!-- [t00:34:28] --> I hadn't taught personality courses before that. And I wasn't <!-- [t00:34:31] --> really a personality psychologist, I had been studying <!-- [t00:34:34] --> alcoholism, and mostly, in some sense at that <!-- [t00:34:36] --> neuropharmacological level. But I was very interested in <!-- [t00:34:39] --> personality theory, and I'd read fairly widely and so I was <!-- [t00:34:42] --> excited about the possibility of being able to teach it. I had <!-- [t00:34:45] --> Timothy Leary's old job there, which I thought was quite <!-- [t00:34:48] --> amusing. And there was still people around who knew of Timothy <!-- [t00:34:51] --> about who had worked with Timothy Leary when I was there. That <!-- [t00:34:54] --> was kind of interesting, historical side note, but it was very <!-- [t00:34:58] --> interesting walking through this <!-- [t00:35:00] --> psychologists because for a long time, I couldn't find an <!-- [t00:35:03] --> integrated thread to link them together because they're quite <!-- [t00:35:06] --> different Freudian thoughts say this thought of BF Skinner, <!-- [t00:35:09] --> effective neuroscientists like Jaak Panksepp the behaviorist <!-- [t00:35:12] --> like, Well, each of these schools had a different approach to <!-- [t00:35:16] --> human behavior. And so while this is the science, <!-- [t00:35:18] --> hypothetically, although was also in the clinical domain, that's <!-- [t00:35:22] --> more like practical engineering. But in principle, these were <!-- [t00:35:25] --> scientific approaches to the problem of human personality. Well, <!-- [t00:35:30] --> why were they coming up with different conclusions? And the <!-- [t00:35:34] --> answer to that, to some degree is something can differ at the <!-- [t00:35:36] --> level of detail and be united at a more profound level. But it <!-- [t00:35:40] --> took me probably 20 years of teaching before I got to the point <!-- [t00:35:43] --> where I could see the underlying commonality across all the <!-- [t00:35:46] --> thinkers that I was presenting. And then that made the course <!-- [t00:35:49] --> quite fun. Because it was like, you only had this idea of <!-- [t00:35:52] --> circumambulation, which was the ability to shed light on <!-- [t00:35:56] --> something by taking snapshots of it in some sense, as you walked <!-- [t00:35:59] --> around, it started to give you a picture of you here, picture <!-- [t00:36:03] --> view here, picture view here, etc. You know, and then if you <!-- [t00:36:07] --> take a lot of pictures of something like that, then they'll <!-- [t00:36:09] --> cohere. And you think, Ah, so that's how those all fit together. <!-- [t00:36:13] -->

<!-- [t00:36:13] --> And so, as I lectured and thought about this over two, almost <!-- [t00:36:18] --> three decade period, I could start to see the underlying <!-- [t00:36:21] --> commonalities and then start to string the course together, like <!-- [t00:36:24] --> beads on a string, you know, like a rosary, let's say that was <!-- [t00:36:26] --> all leading to one thing. So that was, and we're going to try to <!-- [t00:36:29] --> do that as we'd walk through these thinkers. It's partly why <!-- [t00:36:32] --> it's also so useful to start with someone like Nietzsche says, <!-- [t00:36:36] --> the wonderful family resemblance of all Indian Greek and German <!-- [t00:36:39] --> philosophizing is easily enough explained. Well, that's the that <!-- [t00:36:43] --> is that require re recognizing, remembering return in a <!-- [t00:36:47] --> homecoming to a far off ancient common household of the soul out <!-- [t00:36:51] --> of which those ideas formerly grew. philosophizing is so far, a <!-- [t00:36:56] --> kind of atavism of the highest order. Now, you know, it's for <!-- [t00:37:00] --> spending like a week, taking that apart, you see someone who can <!-- [t00:37:04] --> think I've never read anyone who can think like Nietzsche, it's, <!-- [t00:37:08] --> he's a, he was an unbelievably profound thinker. Every he said, <!-- [t00:37:13] --> he was also quite comical. He said, <!-- [t00:37:17] --> I can write in a sentence, what other people can write in a <!-- [t00:37:20] --> book. <!-- [t00:37:22] -->

<!-- [t00:37:22] --> What other people can't write in a book. That's pretty good. A <!-- [t00:37:26] --> it's like, it's a pretty good insult. And then he talks it with <!-- [t00:37:29] --> an even better insults, like, my sentence kills your whole book. <!-- [t00:37:33] -->

<!-- [t00:37:33] --> And really, and that's actually that's absolutely right. When I <!-- [t00:37:36] --> have gone through the books that I've really gone through in <!-- [t00:37:39] --> depth, I often dog ear the pages to indicate that there's an <!-- [t00:37:42] --> idea there that, you know, I might want to return to, I couldn't <!-- [t00:37:45] --> do it with Beyond Good and Evil, for example, because it just <!-- [t00:37:48] --> doggy or every page and the other side's like, there's no point <!-- [t00:37:51] --> doggy every page, it's not a marker, you know? Now there's lots <!-- [t00:37:55] --> of psychology books I read where I like dog, your two pages out <!-- [t00:37:58] --> of 400. So the nature it's like, every sentence, bang, bang, <!-- [t00:38:02] --> bang, and he said, I philosophize with a hammer. So beware, you <!-- [t00:38:06] --> read Nietzsche, he will take you apart. And it's really <!-- [t00:38:10] --> something? Well, because he also, at least to some degree, puts <!-- [t00:38:14] --> you back together to some degree, you know, but you look at <!-- [t00:38:17] --> these sentences, that the separate philosophical ideas are not <!-- [t00:38:21] --> anything optional. Or autonomously evolving? <!-- [t00:38:26] --> Well, that's, that's pretty good. For the first phrase of a <!-- [t00:38:30] --> sentence, right? There are separate philosophical ideas. They're <!-- [t00:38:33] --> not optional. What does that mean? That means you're going to <!-- [t00:38:36] --> stump if you start to think deeply, you're going to stumble <!-- [t00:38:39] --> across them by necessity. And so that points to some underlying <!-- [t00:38:43] --> fundamental reality in the philosophical domain that all <!-- [t00:38:47] --> philosophers are informed by. So it's, he's positing a <!-- [t00:38:51] --> hypothesis of something like intuition. That's the first phrase, <!-- [t00:38:55] --> it's pretty that's pretty damn good for one phrase, or <!-- [t00:38:58] --> autonomously evolving? Well, they don't evolve in independently <!-- [t00:39:03] --> on their own course. Well, why? Well, partly because of this <!-- [t00:39:07] --> deep, intuitive structure, but also, perhaps partly because the <!-- [t00:39:10] --> philosophers are engaged in discussion with each other across <!-- [t00:39:13] --> the centuries. And so there's this organic, complex <!-- [t00:39:16] --> developmental process rooted in intuition, whatever that happens <!-- [t00:39:21] --> to be, that's guiding the development of the entire body of <!-- [t00:39:24] --> thought. It's like this is a major league realization, you know. <!-- [t00:39:27] -->

# Postmodernism

<!-- [t00:39:27] --> So, for example, the postmodern types who bedevil our society at <!-- [t00:39:32] --> the moment with their insistence that no text has a canonical <!-- [t00:39:35] --> interpretation, didn't read Nietzsche properly, because he says, <!-- [t00:39:39] --> Well look, our philosophical systems. So those are the systems <!-- [t00:39:42] --> we impose on the world have an intuitive structure. That's not <!-- [t00:39:46] --> optional. That's not autonomously developing. And so if Derrida <!-- [t00:39:50] --> and Foucault and the other post modernists would have studied <!-- [t00:39:53] --> Nietzsche more deeply even just this sentence, they would have <!-- [t00:39:55] --> realized that the answer to the problem of how <!-- [t00:40:00] --> We interpret the world is to be found in this notion of non <!-- [t00:40:03] --> autonomous philosophical intuition. Now they leapt to the <!-- [t00:40:06] --> conclusion that was all willpower. And Nietzsche talked a lot <!-- [t00:40:09] --> about willpower, but he wasn't. <!-- [t00:40:12] -->

<!-- [t00:40:12] --> Nietzsche didn't think of power as, as dominance and oppression, <!-- [t00:40:16] --> he thought about it more like the will to express yourself in <!-- [t00:40:20] --> life, right, the will to exhaust yourself in the pursuit of your <!-- [t00:40:23] --> life, rather than conserve your energy say, or to maintain <!-- [t00:40:27] --> homeostasis, or some sort of biological triviality like that, <!-- [t00:40:31] --> and so will to power for him was more like will to <!-- [t00:40:34] --> expansiveness. And that was all got demented in its <!-- [t00:40:37] --> interpretation, not least by the Nazis, but, but also by people <!-- [t00:40:41] --> who wish to make the claim that the fundamental human motivation <!-- [t00:40:44] --> is the willpower. It's like Nietzsche is very subtle <!-- [t00:40:47] --> philosopher, you know, and even though he pointed to the death <!-- [t00:40:51] --> of God, and was a great critic of Christianity, especially the <!-- [t00:40:54] --> more naively empathic ends of Christianity, so the naive, the <!-- [t00:40:58] --> naive beliefs that are often confused with Christianity, he, his <!-- [t00:41:04] --> comments on the structure of Christianity and the benefits of <!-- [t00:41:07] --> Christianity are also incredibly subtle. He regarded, for <!-- [t00:41:10] --> example, the entire scientific enterprise as a consequence of at <!-- [t00:41:14] --> least in part as a consequence of the discipline laid down on <!-- [t00:41:19] --> the developing European mind, because he was writing at that <!-- [t00:41:23] --> time, and that place, European mind to interpret everything <!-- [t00:41:27] --> under the rubric of a single structure of interpretation. So <!-- [t00:41:31] --> that's Catholic insistence, right, that everything had to be <!-- [t00:41:33] --> integrated underneath unified theology. Nietzsche believed that <!-- [t00:41:38] --> that provided so you could think of that as the monastic <!-- [t00:41:40] --> training, right? In rigorous theological cognition, he regarded <!-- [t00:41:45] --> that as the precondition for the emergence of the scientific <!-- [t00:41:47] --> endeavor, he thought that Christianity died at the hands of its <!-- [t00:41:52] --> own insistence on truth. And that's just like, that's another <!-- [t00:41:55] --> paragraph of Nietzsche, you know, so it's really quite the <!-- [t00:41:58] --> bloody adventure to, to walk through his thinking. <!-- [t00:42:02] -->

<!-- [t00:42:02] --> And however, suddenly an arbitrarily they seem to appear in the <!-- [t00:42:06] --> history of thought. But another matte, magnificent idea, it's <!-- [t00:42:10] --> like an idea pops up, don't be thinking that it just emerged, <!-- [t00:42:14] --> then it's got a developmental course that might spend hundreds <!-- [t00:42:17] --> of 1000s of years or even longer than that, to, to, to grow from <!-- [t00:42:22] --> the seed that that generated it up into something that can be <!-- [t00:42:25] --> expressed as a explicit semantic idea, tremendous developmental <!-- [t00:42:31] --> pathway, up to the point where the idea can be made manifest as <!-- [t00:42:34] --> something encapsulated in words. And young man, he took that <!-- [t00:42:38] --> idea dead seriously. And in his most terrifying book, and that's <!-- [t00:42:42] --> really saying something ion, he describes the origin for <!-- [t00:42:47] --> example, a fish symbolism and Christianity and the relationship <!-- [t00:42:50] --> between that and astrological thought spanning a time period of <!-- [t00:42:53] --> 4000 years. It's absolutely, like I would be aware of that book, <!-- [t00:42:59] --> I'll tell you that. It's like philosophizing with a hammer is <!-- [t00:43:02] --> one thing. It's more like philosophizing with an atom bomb that <!-- [t00:43:05] --> book. So because you get some sense of the depth of these ideas, <!-- [t00:43:09] --> it's just absolutely beyond comprehension. And you kind of know <!-- [t00:43:13] --> that to some degree, because you see great art, you know, you <!-- [t00:43:15] --> see a piece of great art, and there's something in that man, and <!-- [t00:43:19] --> it's been lurking below the surface for a long time before the <!-- [t00:43:23] --> artists was able to express it. And you can't encapsulate <!-- [t00:43:26] --> everything, the painting says, in its semantic terms, you can't <!-- [t00:43:29] --> understand it, it's got a punch to it. And if anything that's <!-- [t00:43:33] --> deeply symbolic, it's that that's had a genesis of some ideas, <!-- [t00:43:38] --> if there is old as our bodies, you know, they're, they're in <!-- [t00:43:41] --> their embodied form, there are 10s of millions of years old, <!-- [t00:43:44] --> unbelievably, unbelievably deep. And this is something that <!-- [t00:43:48] --> Nietzsche had an inkling of, you know, and more than that, even, <!-- [t00:43:51] --> they nevertheless belong just as much to assist them as the <!-- [t00:43:54] --> collective members of the forerunner of a continent. Perfect <!-- [t00:43:58] --> metaphor, perfect metaphor, you know, he compares it to <!-- [t00:44:01] --> something biological, right? That for the systems of philosophy, <!-- [t00:44:06] --> philosophical thought, might be conceptualized in the same way <!-- [t00:44:09] --> that you would conceptualize a species, not a category, like <!-- [t00:44:12] --> triangles, or rectangles, or squares, but it's really defined at <!-- [t00:44:15] --> its edges, but something that's looser and more alive, like the <!-- [t00:44:19] --> font of a continent, so it nothing he did was accidental. The <!-- [t00:44:23] --> metaphors are chosen carefully. The intuitions are chosen <!-- [t00:44:26] --> carefully. The words are chosen carefully, the phrases, <!-- [t00:44:29] --> everything and so every, every sentence is a little bomb. It's <!-- [t00:44:33] --> really something. And how is this betrayed? <!-- [t00:44:37] --> The most diverse philosophers always feeling again, a definite <!-- [t00:44:40] --> fundamental scheme of possible philosophies. Well, he's saying <!-- [t00:44:43] --> there well wouldn't be comprehensible, otherwise, would it? <!-- [t00:44:46] --> Because unless the philosophizing of a philosopher was in accord <!-- [t00:44:50] --> with your experience, in some manner, it would be completely <!-- [t00:44:53] --> incomprehensible. And so well, how so that's part of the <!-- [t00:44:57] --> solution to how it is that we conceptualize the world <!-- [t00:45:00] --> We have to do it in a manner that's understandable to one <!-- [t00:45:02] --> another, even if we're generating new ideas. And so we're <!-- [t00:45:05] --> referring to some fundamental underlying commonality that unites <!-- [t00:45:09] --> us. What do you Wilson say, a great biologist, if we could talk <!-- [t00:45:13] --> to Aaron's, we would have nothing to say to them. <!-- [t00:45:16] -->

<!-- [t00:45:16] --> Why? Well, because they're not about human business, they're <!-- [t00:45:19] --> doing an things, it's the things they would regard as worth <!-- [t00:45:22] --> discussing, we wouldn't have any, <!-- [t00:45:25] --> it would have nothing to do with us or very little to do with <!-- [t00:45:28] --> us. We can talk to other human beings because they're very much <!-- [t00:45:31] --> like us, right? And the deepest possible sense. So there are <!-- [t00:45:34] --> different philosophies, and encountering those different moral <!-- [t00:45:38] --> philosophies as fragmented us. But Nietzsche is already pointing <!-- [t00:45:41] --> to some underlying unity of philosophy, that's tempting to <!-- [t00:45:45] --> emerge through the philosophies that unites the ball in some <!-- [t00:45:48] --> definite scheme and pointing to the fact that if that wasn't the <!-- [t00:45:51] --> case, we wouldn't be able to understand the philosophies at all. <!-- [t00:45:55] -->

<!-- [t00:45:55] --> And so that's pretty good for and then what, what within them <!-- [t00:46:00] --> leads them? That's a remarkable phrase, it's something within <!-- [t00:46:03] --> them leads them so he's pausing a teleology to philosophy, it's <!-- [t00:46:07] --> goal directed to hell of a statement to make to whip their <!-- [t00:46:10] --> innate myth methodology. What's the methodology? Well, here's <!-- [t00:46:15] --> one thing that unites Dawkins and Christians insistence that <!-- [t00:46:20] --> truth is worth pursuing. Well, that's a methodology. And so <!-- [t00:46:24] --> Nietzsche is pointing right away to the fact that one of the <!-- [t00:46:27] --> things that unites philosophies is the philosophical enterprise <!-- [t00:46:31] --> itself. And that in any genuine philosophy, respect for the <!-- [t00:46:34] --> philosophical enterprise is at the pinnacle of the philosophy, <!-- [t00:46:37] --> and that's something that unites all the philosophies. So that's <!-- [t00:46:41] --> another phrase, you know, <!-- [t00:46:43] --> the, the innate mythique, methodology, and relationship of their <!-- [t00:46:48] --> ideas. <!-- [t00:46:51] -->

<!-- [t00:46:51] --> Well, so we'll leave it at that, but you get the picture, you <!-- [t00:46:53] --> read a book, like Beyond Good and Evil, it's like, every single <!-- [t00:46:55] --> sentence is like that, you can just unpack it and unpack it and <!-- [t00:46:59] --> unpack and and that's because before he wrote the sentence, he <!-- [t00:47:02] --> packed all that into it. So it's really something remarkable. <!-- [t00:47:06] -->

# Constructivism

<!-- [t00:47:06] --> And I pick the people that we're going to talk about, because <!-- [t00:47:09] --> their thinking is like that, you can just unpack it forever. And <!-- [t00:47:12] --> it's so interesting to see the relationship between the thought <!-- [t00:47:16] --> and and especially coming out of it such different angles, you <!-- [t00:47:19] --> know, because we've got statisticians here got artificial <!-- [t00:47:22] --> intelligence, that people who founded the field of computation, <!-- [t00:47:26] --> artificial intelligence, we have people who are deep biological <!-- [t00:47:29] --> thinkers and biological investigators, clinicians, philosophers, <!-- [t00:47:33] --> very, very diverse range of approaches and conclusions, but all <!-- [t00:47:38] --> pointing to some underlying union and unity and necessarily <!-- [t00:47:42] --> right necessarily the point at least to the unity of the human <!-- [t00:47:45] --> being. And you think, Well, is there such a unity? And the <!-- [t00:47:48] --> answer is, well, there is if you're not aimless and anxious, <!-- [t00:47:51] --> because anxiety signals, disunity, and aimlessness signals lack <!-- [t00:47:55] --> of a goal, and a goal unites you. And so if you're aimless and <!-- [t00:48:00] --> anxious, then you're disunited, you're not under the rubric of <!-- [t00:48:03] --> the highest philosophical ideal, let's say, that doesn't mean it <!-- [t00:48:06] --> doesn't exist. And it certainly doesn't mean that you won't pay <!-- [t00:48:10] --> for it. If you don't know it. You will absolutely pay for it <!-- [t00:48:13] --> more than you pay for anything else. And you pay for it with <!-- [t00:48:17] --> aimlessness. And so that's lack of positive emotion. That's lack <!-- [t00:48:20] --> of joy, lack of enthusiasm, lack of that which impels you <!-- [t00:48:24] --> forward in the face of life's obstacles, technically speaking, <!-- [t00:48:28] --> plus, you're confused. And so you're a fragmentary collection of <!-- [t00:48:32] --> dissociated philosophies, and that's extraordinarily painful, <!-- [t00:48:35] --> existentially. <!-- [t00:48:39] -->

<!-- [t00:48:39] --> Pierre Piaget. Piaget various constructivism why construct you <!-- [t00:48:43] --> hear about the social constructivists? Right. Piaget is often <!-- [t00:48:47] --> regarded as a as a social constructivist. And see, it's not <!-- [t00:48:52] --> true, a it's not true. So the constructivist believed that all <!-- [t00:48:56] --> our knowledge is socially constructed, that you're basically a <!-- [t00:48:58] --> blank slate, which you are most decidedly not, that is simply <!-- [t00:49:02] --> wrong. It's wrong scientifically, it's wrong philosophically, <!-- [t00:49:06] --> it's wrong ethically to because if I presuppose that you're <!-- [t00:49:11] --> nothing but what you've learned, then I can make you anything I <!-- [t00:49:14] --> want by teaching you and that that power drive lurks underneath <!-- [t00:49:19] --> those hypothesis, especially in the political domain, this <!-- [t00:49:22] --> insistence, or this criticism, even of people who think <!-- [t00:49:26] --> biologically as biological essentialist. So why is that such a <!-- [t00:49:30] --> big problem socially? It's like, well, because your biological <!-- [t00:49:33] --> essentialism is interfering with the expression of my <!-- [t00:49:36] --> totalitarian utopianism. And that's exactly right. And so no, as <!-- [t00:49:41] --> people have a nature, that's for sure, well, that's what makes <!-- [t00:49:44] --> us people, not lions, or ants, let's say we have a nature now, <!-- [t00:49:48] --> what that nature is, that's a very difficult thing to specify. <!-- [t00:49:51] -->

<!-- [t00:49:51] --> We've been contemplating that so long as we've been self <!-- [t00:49:54] --> conscious. That's a hard task and we are very Prothean and <!-- [t00:49:57] --> malleable, right? We have a basic form <!-- [t00:50:00] --> But we have this tremendous period of dependency as children <!-- [t00:50:04] --> where we develop under the tutelage of the environment. And we <!-- [t00:50:07] --> can become very many different things. We're very flexible and <!-- [t00:50:11] --> adaptable. So the idea that some some of our knowledge is <!-- [t00:50:14] --> constructed, hey, no problem. That's correct. That is way <!-- [t00:50:18] --> different than all of it is constructed. And also, that's just <!-- [t00:50:22] --> technically wrong. Because it can't be true. You can't get the <!-- [t00:50:26] --> act of perception off the ground. Now, Piaget was very <!-- [t00:50:30] --> interested in how structures of knowledge came to be. So you can <!-- [t00:50:33] --> view him as a constructivist that we learn to be what we are. <!-- [t00:50:38] -->

<!-- [t00:50:38] --> But Piaget knew very much that we had a body. And so the the <!-- [t00:50:42] --> fundamental intuitions that are guiding our constructions, let's <!-- [t00:50:46] --> say our learning are embodied realities. We start with the body, <!-- [t00:50:50] --> and that's absolutely explicit. In Piaget. The first concepts <!-- [t00:50:54] --> aren't concepts, they're movements. And so though the biology in <!-- [t00:50:59] --> Piaget is nested inside the body, so he's by no means it can <!-- [t00:51:03] --> appear constructivist. So. So, the radical constructivist don't <!-- [t00:51:07] --> get to pull Piaget into their camp, It either means they're <!-- [t00:51:10] --> willfully blind about what Piaget was doing, or they just don't <!-- [t00:51:13] --> understand what he was doing. And I would say it's a little <!-- [t00:51:16] --> color may, and it's a little a, column B. So <!-- [t00:51:22] --> now, Piaget is difficult to read. Well, it depends on the book. <!-- [t00:51:26] -->

<!-- [t00:51:26] --> And that probably depends on the translation. And a lot of his <!-- [t00:51:28] --> work hasn't yet been translated. It's another indication is, you <!-- [t00:51:32] --> can't believe how much of a genius you have to be before people <!-- [t00:51:35] --> really pay attention to you. So even someone like Piaget has <!-- [t00:51:37] --> many books that aren't yet translated into English. And some of <!-- [t00:51:40] --> them are translated pretty badly. Some of them are translated <!-- [t00:51:43] --> pretty well. <!-- [t00:51:45] -->

<!-- [t00:51:45] --> I've read I don't know seven or eight books by Piaget, and a <!-- [t00:51:48] --> couple of histories of Piaget and thought written by people who <!-- [t00:51:52] --> were pointed out to me as reliable indicators of Piaget and <!-- [t00:51:55] --> thought, and I some of the books I found extremely engrossing. I <!-- [t00:52:00] --> really do think to some degree, it depends on the translation. <!-- [t00:52:04] -->

<!-- [t00:52:04] --> This is a rather awkward quote, I would say stylistically. And <!-- [t00:52:08] --> that's probably a translation problem. But it's really worth <!-- [t00:52:11] --> delving into the common postulate, idea axiom of various <!-- [t00:52:16] --> traditional epistemologies. So that's a theory of valid <!-- [t00:52:20] --> knowledge. How does what is knowledge? How do you know that <!-- [t00:52:22] --> knowledge is valid? How does it relate to the world as such <!-- [t00:52:25] --> epistemology is that knowledge is a fact. Okay, so what's <!-- [t00:52:31] --> knowledge? Well, it's a set of facts about the world. <!-- [t00:52:34] -->

<!-- [t00:52:34] --> Right? Well, that's the enlightenment, materialist, reductionist <!-- [t00:52:39] --> Newtonian viewpoint, let's say, but it's incomplete because you <!-- [t00:52:44] --> can't get an OT from it is. So you have to have knowledge about <!-- [t00:52:49] --> how to act. And how you should act is not a fact. Or if it is a <!-- [t00:52:53] --> fact, it's a strange kind of fact. And it's not one that's <!-- [t00:52:56] --> easily drivable from observation of the external world. <!-- [t00:53:01] -->

<!-- [t00:53:01] --> That would make you an automaton in some sense, right? So <!-- [t00:53:04] --> imagine that merely as a consequence of looking at the world, <!-- [t00:53:07] --> you knew how to act, it's you map the world right onto action. <!-- [t00:53:10] -->

<!-- [t00:53:10] --> There's no choice there. And then Why think, if you can be <!-- [t00:53:13] --> informed about what to do from what is Why do you need the <!-- [t00:53:17] --> intermediary of imagination and cognition? And why do you ever <!-- [t00:53:20] --> have to talk to anyone? <!-- [t00:53:22] --> Well, it's because it's a long way from the territory to the <!-- [t00:53:25] --> map, right? And it's a long way from the map to the destination. <!-- [t00:53:29] -->

<!-- [t00:53:29] --> These are hard problems. And so well, that's why we have a <!-- [t00:53:32] --> brain, you know, because it's a hard problem to map the world on <!-- [t00:53:35] --> to action. And so the facts themselves are not sufficient. And <!-- [t00:53:40] --> so but Piaget is pointing out here, while we tend to think of <!-- [t00:53:42] --> knowledge as a set of facts, it's like that's problematic, <!-- [t00:53:46] --> because it's not merely a set of facts. And so that's part of <!-- [t00:53:49] --> the problem with reduction, reductive materialism. So the world <!-- [t00:53:53] --> is a set of facts, like depends on what you mean by the world. <!-- [t00:53:56] -->

<!-- [t00:53:56] --> You know, if you reduce the world a priori, before you ask the <!-- [t00:54:00] --> question to that domain, that is only facts, then that's true. <!-- [t00:54:04] -->

<!-- [t00:54:04] --> But that's not a valid philosophical move, necessarily, which is <!-- [t00:54:08] --> why Heidegger, for example, develop this philosophy of <!-- [t00:54:12] --> phenomenology. It's like, well, what about imagination? What <!-- [t00:54:14] --> about emotion? What about motivation? What about subjectivity? <!-- [t00:54:19] --> Like, is that not real? Is there is not a fact that that's real. <!-- [t00:54:23] -->

<!-- [t00:54:23] --> Why and you eliminate all that from the objective world. Now <!-- [t00:54:26] --> that's real. It's like, well, you eliminate all the <!-- [t00:54:28] --> subjectivity. Well, what about the subjectivity? And to the <!-- [t00:54:32] --> postmodernist credit, that is one thing they ask, it's like, <!-- [t00:54:35] --> what about the subjectivity? You know, isn't the pain of the <!-- [t00:54:38] --> person you're talking to real? And aren't they the foremost <!-- [t00:54:41] --> authority on that pain, their lived experience? Let's say, now, <!-- [t00:54:44] --> it's a reasonable question because there are things you know, <!-- [t00:54:47] --> that I can't know and vice versa. Now, so there is a domain <!-- [t00:54:51] --> where your subjective knowledge actually rules supreme in <!-- [t00:54:54] --> relationship to what's real. It's very tricky problem this so <!-- [t00:54:59] --> there <!-- [t00:55:00] --> Common postulate of various traditional epistemologies is that <!-- [t00:55:02] --> knowledge is a facts like, no, it's more than it is that but <!-- [t00:55:06] --> it's more than that. It's not a fact either. It's a set of <!-- [t00:55:08] --> facts, right? And then it's a set of particular facts. You <!-- [t00:55:12] --> think, Well, scientists just the facts, ma'am, just like the <!-- [t00:55:15] --> FBI, it's like, no, there's an infinite number of facts, the <!-- [t00:55:18] --> scientists have to pick which facts to study. And that actually <!-- [t00:55:22] --> makes science as far as I'm concerned, a branch of engineering. <!-- [t00:55:27] -->

# Pragmatism

<!-- [t00:55:27] --> And that's why I'm an admirer of the New England pragmatists, <!-- [t00:55:30] --> because they figured out that truth was actually an engineering <!-- [t00:55:33] --> problem, not a scientific problem. It's like, how do you get the <!-- [t00:55:36] --> bridge to stand up? The science has to inform that, but you <!-- [t00:55:40] --> still want to build the bridge. And why is that because you want <!-- [t00:55:43] --> to get from point A to point B. And so our scientific theory is <!-- [t00:55:47] --> ground out in an engineering reality and that grounds out inside <!-- [t00:55:50] --> the body. And it was the new English pragmatists, who we won't <!-- [t00:55:53] --> cover. Unfortunately, William James, and Cs PERS, the greatest <!-- [t00:55:57] --> American philosophers that establishes of the only valid form of <!-- [t00:56:01] --> original American philosophy, derive their notions of pragmatic <!-- [t00:56:06] --> truth, comparing it to engineering as a consequence of being <!-- [t00:56:09] --> exposed to Charles Darwin's text on the Origins of Species. So <!-- [t00:56:12] --> that's how that all came about. So and they realized at that <!-- [t00:56:17] --> point, that knowledge was not a set of fact that that was not <!-- [t00:56:19] --> tenable. And they got it right. And so I believe there's a huge <!-- [t00:56:23] --> conflict between the Newtonian worldview, which is the worldview <!-- [t00:56:26] --> that most scientists hold, even though it's been outdated, <!-- [t00:56:29] --> outdated, it's been updated by quantum mechanics, most <!-- [t00:56:32] --> particularly because the quantum mechanical world is not <!-- [t00:56:34] --> deterministic. Now, it's actually a big deal. It's not a little <!-- [t00:56:38] --> deal. And Newtonian physics is a branch of quantum mechanics. <!-- [t00:56:42] -->

<!-- [t00:56:42] --> And in the Newtonian world, you can have deterministic systems, <!-- [t00:56:45] --> right, that are bottom up, like Dawkins view of genetic what <!-- [t00:56:49] --> what the actions of DNA, let's say, it's all algorithmic, it's <!-- [t00:56:52] --> like, it's not all algorithmic. That's not correct. It's not <!-- [t00:56:55] --> even technically correct. It's not even scientifically correct. <!-- [t00:56:59] -->

<!-- [t00:56:59] --> So what is knowledge? It's not just a set of facts, just like <!-- [t00:57:03] --> words are not labels for things. That's what we think, you know, <!-- [t00:57:08] --> we've asked someone to word is label for a thing. All right, <!-- [t00:57:12] --> what's the thing? Well, that's a problem, man. beanbag stump. <!-- [t00:57:18] -->

<!-- [t00:57:18] --> No objective features in common. Both chairs? What is the thing? <!-- [t00:57:24] --> Well, that's a tough question. And the idea that something <!-- [t00:57:27] --> objective is like, not very often, and mostly, if it's only <!-- [t00:57:31] --> something objective, you how many grains are there on a beach <!-- [t00:57:35] --> grains of sand on a beach? Where you don't care? And like, how <!-- [t00:57:39] --> many questions can you ask like that? How many grains of sand? <!-- [t00:57:43] --> Are there in a quart container of the sand on a beach? How about <!-- [t00:57:46] --> a two quart container? How about all the beaches, about all the <!-- [t00:57:49] --> beaches in the universe? It's like, there's a lot of facts. <!-- [t00:57:53] -->

<!-- [t00:57:53] --> Well, we only attend to a very small number of them. And we do <!-- [t00:57:56] --> that by using these philosophical systems that are embedded in <!-- [t00:58:00] --> our intuitions and a consequence of our communication. And <!-- [t00:58:03] --> that's not all willpower. That wouldn't work if it was, <!-- [t00:58:08] --> first of all, try dominating the world and see how far that gets <!-- [t00:58:13] --> you. And then the other problem is, try dominating other people. <!-- [t00:58:17] -->

<!-- [t00:58:17] --> It's not like they won't push back, say the most dominant person <!-- [t00:58:20] --> wins. It's like, no, they don't. The most dominant people are <!-- [t00:58:23] --> psychopaths. And you think, well, they win. And they don't, <!-- [t00:58:27] --> they're 3% of the population that stable biologically across <!-- [t00:58:30] --> cultures, it's not a very effective survival or reproduction <!-- [t00:58:34] --> strategy. It's better than absolute chaos and anxiety, probably, <!-- [t00:58:39] --> because maybe you commit suicide under those conditions. But <!-- [t00:58:41] --> it's by no means optimal. It's not prevalent, and it doesn't <!-- [t00:58:46] --> spread. <!-- [t00:58:48] -->

<!-- [t00:58:48] --> Power is not a stable long term playable game, period. And so <!-- [t00:58:55] --> the notion that our fundamental social structures are, in their <!-- [t00:58:58] --> essence, patriarchal systems of oppression, is naive <!-- [t00:59:03] --> philosophically, it's appalling, theologically, it's destructive <!-- [t00:59:08] --> socially, and it's devastating, psychologically, apart from just <!-- [t00:59:13] --> being wrong <!-- [t00:59:18] --> is that knowledge is a fact and not a process. <!-- [t00:59:21] -->

<!-- [t00:59:21] --> Well, Nietzsche had pointed that some degree when he talked <!-- [t00:59:25] --> about the methodology of philosophy, all the philosophers agree <!-- [t00:59:29] --> on the means a philosophical investigation, right to hold the <!-- [t00:59:32] --> truth in the highest place and to explore well, so when Piaget <!-- [t00:59:36] --> was investigating knowledge, he really wanted to investigate not <!-- [t00:59:40] --> so much knowledge as a set of static facts, but the process by <!-- [t00:59:43] --> which knowledge was generated. He regarded that as the key fact. <!-- [t00:59:47] -->

<!-- [t00:59:47] --> The key fact to investigate is the manner in which facts <!-- [t00:59:50] --> themselves are generated. Very, very smart, brilliant, brilliant <!-- [t00:59:55] --> bit of intuition, and he definitely did that. It's very relevant <!-- [t00:59:59] --> to <!-- [t00:59:59] -->
